design-proposal: instancetype.kubevirt.io - Support custom resource sizing (#318)
kubevirt/community: design-proposals/instancetype.kubevirt.io/custom-resource-sizing.md

# Design

## Support for user supplied vCPU and memory instance type resource sizing

The original design of the instance type API and CRDs required that vCPU and memory resource sizing was always provided when creating an instance type. This obviously constrained users to the resource sizing already baked into commonly deployed instance types within their environment.

It would be more flexible if the resource sizing within an instance type was optional and could instead be provided by the users VirtualMachine.

### Make `spec.cpu.guest` and `spec.memory.guest` optional

The first step here is to make both the amount of vCPUs and memory provided by an instance type optional. This behavioral change will require a new version of the API, `instancetype.kubevirt.io/v1beta2`.

### Introduce `spec.template.spec.domain.cpu.guest`

This is an optional step and aims to align the VM and instance type APIs in terms of expressing the number of vCPUs requested by each. 

Until now the VM could only express an amount of vCPU resource through resource requests or through the guest visible CPU topology with the number of vCPUs being the total of sockets\*cores\*threads.

> By introducing a standalone `guest` attribute that expresses a number of vCPUs we can also allow this value to be used by any associated preference when determining the CPU visible topology.

Author: ACK yeah I thought it might be heading that way. I'll add the above detail and write some draft code and see what the API folks think before I do.

Without the use of a preference the vCPUs provided by this field will be made visible to the guest OS as sockets by default.

This field would be the only supported way of providing a number of vCPUs using the VM when also using an instance type without a set amount of vCPUs.

### Provide a `custom` size for each common-instancetypes instance type class

> A new `custom` size would be introduced for each instance type class without vCPUs or memory defined allowing users to provide their own values through the VirtualMachine.

Author: ACK yeah I'll add a note here.

## Allow for the easy creation of customization common-instancetype resources

### Introduce `virtctl customize`

This new `virtctl` sub-command would allow users to make subtle changes to existing resources within the cluster, outputting a fresh version they can either save locally or apply directly.

Initial support for instance types would be provided and allow the amount of vCPU and RAM supplied by an instance type to be changed. Support for more switches could then follow depending on feedback from users.

> The command will also support switching between the cluster and namespaced kinds of instance types and preferences. This should allow a user to take a cluster wide deployed `common-instancetype` such as `u1.medium` and replace it with a namespaced version specific to their workload use case within a namespace they control.

Author: ACK, I'll add a `for example` beforehand.

      VM. In order to ensure this, some additional cores (depending
      on the number of disks and NICs) will be requested to offload
      the IO threading from cores dedicated to the workload.
      In addition, in this series, the NUMA topology of the used
      cores is provided to the VM.
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/displayName: Compute Exclusive
  labels:
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/class: compute.exclusive
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/cpu: custom
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/dedicatedCPUPlacement: "true"
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/hugepages: "true"
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/icon-pf: pficon-registry
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/isolateEmulatorThread: "true"
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/memory: custom
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/numa: "true"
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/vendor: kubevirt.io
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/version: "1"
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/size: custom
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/common-instancetypes-version: v1.2.0
  name: cx1.custom
spec:
  cpu:
    dedicatedCPUPlacement: true
    isolateEmulatorThread: true
    numa:
      guestMappingPassthrough: {}
  ioThreadsPolicy: auto
  memory:
    hugepages:
      pageSize: 2Mi
```

```shell

> $ virtctl customize clusterinstancetype u1.medium --name u1.mysize --kind instancetype --vcpus 4 --memory 4Gi | kubectl apply -f -

Reviewer: Will it strip `instancetype.kubevirt.io/common-instancetypes-version` and `instancetype.kubevirt.io/version`?

> $ virtctl customize clusterinstancetype u1.medium --name u1.mysize --kind instancetype --vcpus 4 --memory 4Gi | kubectl apply -f -

Reviewer: Can you add a list of supported customization fields? (e.g. `cpu`, `memory` and `gpu`?)

> $ virtctl create vm --instancetype virtualmachineinstancetype/u1.mysize [..] | kubectl apply -f

Reviewer 2: Can you please add info what the user needs to do, in order to apply these changes to an exsiting VM? (e.g. clear revisionName, etc.)

## Goals

* Allow users to provide their own vCPU and memory resource sizing while using commonly deployed instance types  
* Make it as easy as possible for cluster admins and users to create and consume their own versions of commonly deployed instance types and preferences

## Non Goals

## User Stories

* As a VM owner I want to provide my own vCPU and memory resource sizing while using commonly deployed instance types  
* As a VM owner I want to create customized versions of commonly deployed instance types and preferences specific to my workload use case  
* As a cluster admin I want users to be able to provide their own vCPU and memory resource sizing when using commonly deployed instance types  
* As a cluster admin I want to create customized versions of commonly deployed instance types and preferences specific to my workload use case

## Repos

* `kubevirt/kubevirt`  
* `kubevirt/common-instancetypes`

# Design

> ## Support for user supplied vCPU and memory instance type resource sizing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Support for user-supplied vCPU and memory instance type resource sizing
```

> The original design of the instance type API and CRDs required that vCPU and memory resource sizing was always provided when creating an instance type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The original design of the instance type API and CRDs required vCPU and memory resource sizing to always be provided when creating an instance type.
```

This obviously constrained users to the resource sizing already baked into commonly deployed instance types within their environment.

It would be more flexible if the resource sizing within an instance type was optional and could instead be provided by the users VirtualMachine.

### Make `spec.cpu.guest` and `spec.memory.guest` optional

> The first step here is to make both the amount of vCPUs and memory provided by an instance type optional. This behavioral change will require a new version of the API, `instancetype.kubevirt.io/v1beta2`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first step here is to make both the quantity of vCPUs and memory provided by an instance type optional. This behavioral change will require a new version of the API, `instancetype.kubevirt.io/v1beta2`.
```

### Introduce `spec.template.spec.domain.cpu.guest`

> This aims to align the VirtualMachine and instance type APIs in terms of expressing the number of vCPUs of provide to the eventual guest.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This aims to align the VirtualMachine and instance type APIs in terms of expressing the number of vCPUs to provide to the eventual guest.
```

> Until now the VM could only express an amount of vCPU resource through resource requests or through the guest visible CPU topology with the number of vCPUs being the total of sockets\*cores\*threads.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Until now the VM could only express a quantity of vCPU resource through resource requests or through the guest visible CPU topology with the number of vCPUs being the total of sockets\*cores\*threads.
```

By introducing a standalone `guest` attribute that expresses a number of vCPUs we can also allow this value to be used by any associated preference when determining the guest visible CPU topology.

> Without the use of a preference the vCPUs provided by this field will be made visible to the guest OS as single core sockets by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Without the use of a preference, the vCPUs provided by this field would be made visible to the guest OS as single core sockets by default.
```

> This field would be the only supported way of providing a number of vCPUs using the VM when also using an instance type without a set amount of vCPUs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This field will be the only supported way of providing a number of vCPUs for the VM when also using an instance type without a set amount of vCPUs.
```

> The field would also be mutually exclusive with the original `spec.template.spec.domain.cpu.{cores,sockets,threads}` fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The field will also be mutually exclusive with the original `spec.template.spec.domain.cpu.{cores,sockets,threads}` fields.
```

### Provide a `custom` size for each common-instancetypes instance type class

> A new `custom` size would be introduced for all but the universal instance type class without vCPUs or memory defined allowing users to provide their own values through the VirtualMachine.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A new `custom` size would be introduced to all but the universal instance type class without vCPUs or memory defined, allowing users to provide their own values through the VirtualMachine spec.
```

> A `custom` size obviously not making sense for the universal instance type class that only provides vCPUs and memory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A `custom` size obviously doesn't make sense for the universal instance type class which only provides vCPUs and memory.
```
Not sure what you mean here actually..

## Allow for the easy creation of customization common-instancetype resources

> ### Introduce `virtctl customize`

Reviewer 3: Why? Can't users just `kubectl edit` to make changes?

Author: The use case with `virtctl customize` is that we want to start with an object in the cluster, make some small changes, automate kind conversion/metadata removal and then output the newly crafted definition.

Does `kubectl edit` actually support taking an existing object and only outputting the result locally? I thought it always attempted to mutate the object in the cluster?

    instancetype.kubevirt.io/hugepages: "true"
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/icon-pf: pficon-registry
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/isolateEmulatorThread: "true"
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/memory: custom
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/numa: "true"
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/vendor: kubevirt.io
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/version: "1"
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/size: custom
    instancetype.kubevirt.io/common-instancetypes-version: v1.2.0
  name: cx1.custom
spec:
  cpu:
    dedicatedCPUPlacement: true
    isolateEmulatorThread: true
    numa:
      guestMappingPassthrough: {}
  ioThreadsPolicy: auto
  memory:
    hugepages:
      pageSize: 2Mi
```

```shell
$ virtctl customize u1.medium --name u1.mysize --vcpus 4 --memory 4Gi | kubectl apply -f -
$ virtctl create vm --instancetype virtualmachineinstancetype/u1.mysize [..] | kubectl apply -f
```

## Scalability

This should hopefully reduce the common-instancetypes footprint by removing some more extreme sizes from the generated resources.

## Update/Rollback Compatibility

All existing `VirtualMachines` using instance types should continue to work.

## Functional Testing Approach

> As with every API related change extensive functional and unit tests should be written to assert the above behaviour but there isn't anything overly special to cover here.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As with every API-related change, extensive functional and unit tests will be written to assert the above behavior, but there isn't anything overly special to cover here.
```
